---
title: "How to do an Extended Science Mission Proposal (from a baby who has no idea what she's doing)"
date: 2021-09-14T19:00:00-04:00
published: true
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - lro
  - nasa
  - diviner
  - wholetmedrivethisthing
---

As I’ve mentioned in [previous posts](https://cailingallinger.medium.com/hello-world-b2ad230134f1), I’ve been working with the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) team since the start of my Master’s degree in 2017. At the time, I assumed this would be a short-lived tenure, as it had been for my other lab members through their graduate degrees – you find a research topic, you analyze your data, and you get the hell out.

Well, four years and two graduate programs later… I guess I’m still here? One of the major factors behind that, of course, was that I didn’t really successfully accomplish the goal I set out to do in my Master’s thesis originally, and while I transitioned to working in the public service sector, in my off days and evenings I was just… still going at it. (Before you ask, yes, I’m a Taurus.) We originally wanted to get a publication out ASAP, but as the months dragged on and I continued to bash my head against modelling and processing the data correctly ([see previous headaches](https://cailingallinger.medium.com/super-model-b3396b76a2ab)), it seemed more and more like this would be a long slog to the finish line. My former supervisor did ask the instrument PI if my continued involvement with the instrument science team was okay sans institutional affiliation, which he confirmed, and I’ve subsequently been told I apparently make somewhat useful contributions to the team? Not bad for a baby without a single peer-reviewed publication under her belt 😏

Anyway, back to the point: In 2018, as my Master’s program was coming to a drawn-out close, the Diviner team was also ramping up for a big project that would take the better part of the year: their contribution to the [Fourth Extended Science Mission proposal for LRO](https://www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/2019/nasa-reflects-on-legacy-of-lro-as-moon-orbiting-mission-reaches-10-year-anniversary). These intermittent bureaucratic gauntlets are a critical component of the justification for the operating budget of space programs the world over, but especially for NASA in particular. They are the way NASA justifies its own spending to itself, the federal government, and ultimately, to the tax-paying public---especially when that spending largely involves paying the salaries of people after a mission has actually been designed, built, tested, and launched. During a cutthroat week-long gathering, officials from NASA and other government agencies gather in a swanky hotel somewhere in middle America to answer the time-honoured question: “Why should we spend money on understanding the Universe instead of bombing the Middle East, anyway?”

Snark aside, this is an unfortunately common position for scientists to find themselves in throughout recent history, as fundamental science can often seem distant and out-of-touch to a tax-paying public who are understandably far more concerned with when their next paycheque is coming, or where they’ll get their next meal, or how much they’ll have to pay to take the bus. Science can seem like a luxury when put in stark contrast to pressing issues like underfunded education, the housing crisis, rising cost of food, and other modern maladies (Americentric or not). The long-trotted out argument that [NASA costs less than a penny on the dollar](https://www.nasa.gov/specials/value-of-nasa/) compared to other massive government overspending (whether [accurate or not](https://www.smallstepstospace.com/content/2015/9/17/the-mythical-penny-for-nasa)) does little to convince working-class citizens that the absolute size of that dollar should be increased further (since we’d never---_gasp_---shift funding away from the over-bloated military!)

Additionally, these mission extension proposals and reviews have been a part of NASA’s Science and Mission Directorate’s other divisions (namely Astrophysics) [for decades](https://www.nap.edu/read/23624/chapter/1), while the Division for Planetary Science only really had to join the rat race with the introduction of the [NASA Authorization Act of 2005](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NASA_Authorization_Act_of_2005). This act put in place more formalized constraints and processes for NASA’s budgetary requirements which stipulated that mission extensions should be approved on a biennial basis, with alternating years for Earth Science and Heliophysics (odd-numbered years) and Astrophysics and Planetary Science (even-numbered years). This has since been switched to a [once-every-three-year cadence](https://spacenews.com/report-recommends-less-frequent-reviews-of-ongoing-nasa-science-missions/), but with the previous LRO mission extension (ESM3) falling in 2016, it was now time to get ready for the next phase: ESM4.

Throughout the year, there were many telecons to assemble the results achieved during ESM3, as well as to define the goals of ESM4. The major shift during this mission phase was a focus on “Science Themes” instead of individual instrument operations. This resulted in more focused and cohesive science questions that utilized LRO’s unprecedented high-spatial-coverage multi-instrument capabilities and long-period temporal coverage for their proposed resolution. For each of the Science Themes, a Theme Lead was assigned whose job it was to wrangle any scientists working on problems within that scope into a cohesive group. From what I remember of it, it was the first time I really saw extensive cross-instrument collaboration on the LRO team, and I was excited at the prospect of really getting to utilize the diverse strengths of both the spacecraft and the people working on it to advance lunar science.

When the final proposal was put together in February 2019, we had whittled it down to a 30-page summary (excluding appendices) that was sent to the Senior Review Panel. This document would be read over the next two months by the Panel, and then, following a presentation during the aforementioned week-long brouhaha, would be cross-examined by subject matter experts (SMEs) to determine the significance and feasibility of the extended mission in addressing the proposed science goals. And check it out: it even included a tiiiiiiny reference to my M.Sc. thesis!

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/ESM4_my_part_highlighted.png" alt="Section of a page of the ESM4 proposal document, with a reference to my MSc thesis highlighted in fuchsia" caption="Ignore the fact that I never actually published this!" %}

By the time the ESM4 review panel was happening, I was caught up in starting my new job at the Ontario Science Centre, so I didn’t have much time to participate and read all the emails about how things went and where we stood. However, by the end of May, we got the call: we were getting another 3 years of funding!

I say we perhaps a little too freely here, as---due to being both an unofficial member of the team, as well as a Canadian citizen ineligible for funding through most NASA grants---I’ll likely never see a drop of it. But it would pay at least some part of the salaries of the people I’d grown close with in the lunar science community, and provide an opportunity to engage in some exciting new observations that would be planned by sub-groups of the instrument science team---including yours truly. 😌💅🏻

So now, we’re in 2021. It’s been two years; a global pansexual happened, the U.S. restored a minor semblance of its gubernatorial sanity, and [NASA and the CSA decided returning humans to the Moon in the next three years was really important for some reason](https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/eng/astronomy/moon-exploration/artemis-missions.asp). Up in space, about a hundred kilometers above the surface of the Moon, LRO's been steadfastly orbiting away, slewing and taking data and sending down [photos of stark, stunning landscapes](http://lroc.sese.asu.edu/posts/1090). It's got fuel and battery capacity left in it for at least another five years of operations. 2022 is fast approaching, and with that means: ESM5. 

This time, I’ve been involved almost since the mission proposal preparation was announced, and I’m trying to take a more active role in the proposing, writing, and editing of this important document. I’m (sort-of) affiliated with two different LRO instruments now, Diviner and Mini-RF, and I’m hoping I can use the experience I have to fill in one tiny piece of the grand puzzle of future lunar exploration.

At our most recent all-hands meeting, the Theme Leads presented their overviews of the major science questions to be addressed in the coming mission extension, as well as what are known as “quad charts”: single powerpoint slides that summarize science questions, intended observations, and expected outcomes, along with a pretty eye-candy figure I guess for people like me with -7 attention span. Guys. I really can’t overstate this. [NASA](https://gmao.gsfc.nasa.gov/projects/columbia/slides/EnKF_Quad.pdf) [fucking](https://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/20190030770/downloads/20190030770.pdf) [LOVES](https://ehb8.gsfc.nasa.gov/sbir/public/documentDownload;jsessionid=QCEfz6RPsxw5ZMIjbvgZOOdin5tgbMalYwjoEopWhFR07ajJ8nK5!-33163174?contractNum=NNJ08JA64C&severFile=157445_11_19_2010_13_06_52.pdf&proposalId=SBIR_06_P2_066837) [quad](https://esto.nasa.gov/files/EntryQuad_instructions_template.ppt) [charts](https://cce-signin.gsfc.nasa.gov/online_help_docs/quadchart_help.html), for whatever reason. Anyways, since they were being solicited for this portion of the process, and my supervisor suggested I could format my results into one, I went ahead and... did that:

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/Impact_melt_quad-Gallinger14092021.png" alt="An average, run-of-the-mill, NASA-approved quad chart" caption="Is this proprietary? Uhhhhhhhhhh" %}

The Regolith and Impacts theme, led by [Dr. Catherine Elder](https://science.jpl.nasa.gov/people/Elder/), also had a discussion last Thursday focusing on how impact craters degrade over time with exposure to the incessant bombardment of the space environment, and how we could combine observations across LRO's instruments to understand this process in finer detail. From that discussion, the idea of making a timeline cataloguing all of the various crater features and processes known to affect them on the Moon emerged. This would be useful in, for example, identifying timescales where features overlap, to better constrain the chronology of the bombardment of the inner solar system, or where there are gaps in the timeline that could maybe be addressed through further observations. I took a first pass at constructing such a figure, which resulted in this:

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/crater_age_chronometers_v1.1.png" alt="Yeah I do graphic design in PowerPoint" caption="" %}

A little messy and hard to read, sure, but the basic idea is there! I wanted to include figures that showcased the youngest and oldest end of the various age ranges that I could find in the literature, as well as approximately arrange them by instrument type (compositional/thermal infrared/radar imaging, from top to bottom respectively). It needs some work, for sure, but when Catherine presented it at the all-hands ESM5 meeting today the Project Scientist, [Noah Petro](https://www.nasa.gov/mediacast/gravity-assist-podcast-mapping-the-moon-with-noah-petro), said he really liked it and would love to include a refined version in the final proposal. So... score one for giving things a go!

Over the next few months, the Theme Leads will delegate writing assignments to various LRO team members based on our contributions to the science themes, and then sometime in October we'll pull it all together for a first real, full draft of ESM5. Then it's on to edits and additions until the deadline next February, when---hopefully!---I'll have submitted a paper that can be included in the list of the many accomplishments we've made these past three years. Wish me (and the whole team) good luck!

-xoxo gossip grad

