---
title: "Vaxx Faxx"
date: 2022-02-09T09:00:00-04:00
published: false
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - sigh
---

So, I guess it's time to acknowledge the elephant in the room. Or should I say, the truck.

I've been watching the events of the past two weeks unfold from afar, somewhat detached from them as---for once---the people waving Trump flags and wearing MAGA hats weren't marching down _my_ street about it. But I sincerely believe that, as informed citizens as well as academics, we have a responsibility to keep our heads out of the clouds and pay attention to the issues affecting broader society, and to use what knowledge and skills we have to contribute to solving them. Hence, this post.

It's been a whirlwind of reaction and counter-reaction throughout the past two weeks, as members of the anti-vaccine-mandate "Freedom Convoy" [first descended on Ottawa](https://ottawa.ctvnews.ca/downtown-ottawa-roads-businesses-shut-down-as-freedom-convoy-protesters-flood-parliament-hill-1.5759563), then were condemned for [defacing the Terry Fox statue and the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier](https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2022/01/29/officials-decry-desecration-of-monuments-during-ottawa-protest.html) and [intimidating staff at a local soup kitchen](https://www.narcity.com/ottawa/an-ottawa-soup-kitchens-staff-was-reportedly-harassed-by-protesters-wanting-food), then were reported to be seen waving [Confederate and Nazi flags](https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/manitoba-premier-heather-stefanson-condemns-hate-images-deplorable-1.6334461), which were then [promptly decried as false flag attempts](https://pressprogress.ca/anti-vax-convoy-leader-says-he-welcomes-protesters-displaying-confederate-flags-in-ottawa/) to discredit the movement, until [additional revelations came out that members of QAnon may be behind the whole thing](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/08/canada-ottawa-trucker-protest-extremist-qanon-neo-nazi).

There have been many signs from the beginning that this is not, in fact, a grassroots movement of long-haul transportation workers standing up to a restriction that is harming their livelihoods. In fact, the complaints don't even really make sense, as the vaccine "mandate" is only necessary if cross-border truckers want to avoid a 14-day quarantine, and similar restrictions have been [imposed from the US side of the border](https://www.businessinsider.com/truckers-vaccine-mandate-drivers-crossing-us-border-biden-2021-11) anyway. No one is _making_ anyone get a vaccine if they don't want to---there are just reasonable precautions in place now to reduce cross-border transmission of SARS-CoV-2. The fact that [over 90% of Canada's truck drivers are vaccinated](https://globalnews.ca/news/8533779/truckers-convoy-canada-vaccine-mandate/) and that the majority of the protestors in the convoys are not actually truckers themselves is scarcely mentioned anywhere amongst the ranks of the anti-vax crowd.

Still, conservatives (both big and small 'c') and posts on social media would have you believe we're living in an authoritarian state, where people are being forced against their will to receive a "dangerous" and "experimental" vaccine that will poison us all or, worse, make us mindless zombies under scary evil Justin Trudeau's control (made all the more repugnant by the Ottawa protestors [wearing yellow stars](https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/vaccine-protesters-holocaust-comparisons-1.6175321), as if there were any remotely reasonable comparison to be made while they continue to occupy and shut down an entire city without consequence.)

Phrased this way, the hyperbole is obvious; but still, there have been people even amongst my friends and family who have been wary of the COVID vaccines, citing milder versions of the concerns above. Are they right to be? After all, [there _have_ been examples of government medical abuses in the past](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tuskegee_Syphilis_Study) where citizens were lied to and experimented on against their will. (One may note, however, the conspicuous difference in the skin colour of the affected people in those studies vs. the majority of the protestors in the current event.)

While I don't think I'm anywhere near good enough of a writer or charismatic enough of a personality to say anything about the protests that hasn't already been said better somewhere else, I _do_ think I have a fairly adept capacity to dig through mountains of boring scientific papers in order to find actual citations for the supposed claims people make about the vaccines---both for and against---and be able to present them in context. So without further ado, let's dive in, hennies:

I'm going to go through several of the claims on the [CDC's Myths and Facts about COVID-19 website](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/facts.html), since they're good jumping off points to examine each claim more closely. To start with: 

## Are COVID-19 vaccines dangerous?

While the pace of development of the Pfizer, Moderna, and Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccines has been unprecedented, the technologies underlying them have been in development for years. mRNA vaccines were first proposed [back in the 80s](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-021-02483-w), but faced technical hurdles as the delicate molecules were quickly broken down before they could make their way into the bodies' cells. Advances in nanotechnology over the past couple of years [finally paved the way for them to be effectively delivered](https://publichealth.jhu.edu/2021/the-long-history-of-mrna-vaccines), but until the COVID-19 pandemic the commercial incentives to test them more widely simply didn't exist. The history of this whole process is summarized well in the links above, there's also a good video laying out the technology published by the website _Vox_ last year:

{% include video id="mvA9gs5gxNY" provider="youtube" %}

Additionally, to speed up the process of testing and approval for the vaccines, the normal double-blind clinical trial phases that all new drugs and treatments go through were overlapped with one another. This allowed results of the clinical trials to be available within a single year, instead of the multiple years most drugs take to get through this process.

Importantly, despite the overlap in trial phases, _no tests or steps were skipped in the vaccine approval process_. These vaccines all passed the necessary safety requirements, with a very large sample size and multiple potential at-risk groups encompassed to determine the range of side effects. This process is explained well in this other video from _Vox_ (don't be afraid based on the title, however!):

{% include video id="r2fxJI_cP58" provider="youtube" %}

## But what about pregnant people?

Concerns over the demographics of the trial groups are [definitely worth considering](https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/28/2724/6158503), but claims that there are no data on the effects of the vaccines on pregnant people (or other at-risk groups) _at all_ [are simply untrue](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41577-021-00525-y?s=09).


[More facts added soon!]


## The ugly truth

While there are many reasons people are afraid of the new COVID-19 vaccines, what doesn't get discussed nearly as much are the reasons to be more afraid of actually _getting_ the illness. Anti-vaxxers often tout the "99% survival rate" of COVID-19 cases, and how the disease is "just like the flu", while ignoring the extensive body of research that now exists into the harmful short- and long-term effects of being infected.

For example, (something about effects on epithelial lining/heart attack risk/etc.)

Additionally, claims that COVID-19 only affects those with "pre-existing conditions" as a way to dismiss the aforementioned acute and chronic detrimental effects ignore the fact that [over ()% of people have at least one of those conditions](vaccines). Many of them are extremely common and seemingly innocuous: (), (), (). You can _feel_ perfectly healthy and fit, engaged in exercise and eating a varied diet and whatever other markers of a "responsible" lifestyle you wish to uphold, and yet [still be at a significantly increased risk of permanent damage or death](vaccines).

This is the reality of the situation we're in: everyone is experiencing extreme emotional and mental burnout from the barrage of updates, restrictions, changes in policy, and developing science that have occurred over the past two years. The desire to seek out simple narratives that condense this complicated web into only right-or-wrong actions---good vs. evil forces---is incredibly understandable. But doing so actually removes each person's individual agency, and places it in the hands of those with reasons to want to only present a simplified narrative---whether they be malicious or not, and whichever side you believe is which.

Those who say they want to inform themselves, to question what they're told, and to dig beneath the surface are right to do so; it's a discredit to the general public's intelligence to believe they need the dumbed-down version in order to understand what's going on, that they would not be interested in the hard data. But equally important, if one is considering undertaking such efforts, is to actually seek out the primary literature, to examine the ways scientific conclusions get framed to rhetorical and political ends, and to be critical of one's own faculties for processing such a vast volume of knowledge and synthesizing answers out of it. Personally, I know that I'm no molecular biologist, or epidemiologist, or biochemist, and the facts and conclusions I've presented here are only those I could discern to the best of my ability as someone with a background in the scientific world.

At the end of the day, however, my gut instinct is to trust those who _are_ working in those professions, who've dedicated their entire lives to these pursuits, and to look at the _consensus_ opinion as characterized by the relative proportion of people arguing for or against certain ideas. Similar to climate science, I believe an analysis of this literature does support the idea that there is such a consensus opinion, regardless of how often we're bombarded with anecdotal evidence of "doubt" or "confusion" or "uncertainty" amongst scientists. Becoming responsibly informed is a fundamentally democratic process, and much like other aspects of democracy it sometimes takes work if we want to fully understand the issues and come to well-supported conclusions about them.

I don't think this post will convince anyone who is already set on a belief that vaccines are dangerous, or who already have a vendetta against the current government, but I do hope that it's given anyone with an inclination to ask "but how do we _know_?" a slightly deeper look into the ways it's possible to answer that question. Science isn't a panacea, but neither should it be ignored or considered equivocal; it is a tool like any other in human history, with both limitations _and_ incredibly powerful benefits. My hope is that we can continue to minimize the former, while expanding both access to and applicability of the latter.

For now, stay safe out there, and I hope to see you on the other end of this long, winding road.

-xoxo gossip grad
